# Exquisite Haiku
Experiments with Real-Time, Collaborative Poetry Composition


### Introduction: The Exquisite Corpse and the "Fold"

First played in the early 1920's at rue Fontaine #42 in Paris, the "Exquisite Corpse" was one of the earliest and most influential of the Surrealist parlor games. A group of people sit around a table and pass around a piece of paper - each player writes or sketches a new bit of content onto the page, and then folds the paper so that the next person can only see small portion of composite image closest to the next blank space. The end result is a blocky, phantasmagorical mash-up of the players' contributions, all highly individuated but bound together by an amorphous daisy-chain of associations emerging from each players' patrial but incomplete knowledge of the whole.

For Breton and the Surrealists, this disjointedness was a feature, not a bug - these "chain games" were efforts to invent alterntive modes of artistic praxis that moved away from what was considered to be the rigid, stifling intentionalism and rationality of conventional, single-author works and towards a collaborative, almost ritualistic communion with the _sur_ (super) reality of Freudian free-association, a hop-scotching movement between images and motifs. The "links" of the chain _needed_ to be blocky, rough, and obviously collaborative.

At times, though, the game drifted in other directions. Susan Laxon describes a variation of the game played by Breton in the mid-1930's that did away with the concealing "folds," instead allowing the players to see the whole work before they added their contributions. These works were also subjected to various degrees of after-the-fact refinement - "corrections" to smooth over the rough edges between the sections, touch-ups on the shading, and other post-processing that seemed designed to iron over the collaborative nature of the process. For Laxon, this is essentially an artistic error, at least when help up against the intellectual goals of the movement - the effort to "smooth" or "refine" the collaboration has the paradoxical effect of pushing the game back in the direction of single-author unity. The Corpse stakes its claim to originality on the abrupt, lurching defamiliarization brought on by the juxtaposition of the discrete sections. As the sections bleed together and the word starts to reassemble towards cohesion, the corpse cedes its _raison d'être_.

Of course, none of the actual works produced under the modified rule set actually get close to this hypothetical endpoint. As Laxon observes, even the most polished and "corrected" of the corpses created during this period are still extremely disjointed by any conventional standard; they were starting to trend in the direction of unity, but they still bore the obvious mark of multiple hands. In one example from 1931, Laxon can easily trace out one-to-one correspondences between the individual players and individual sections of the corpse - the wheel-shaped head belongs to the table-like waist to Breton, the horse imagery to Eluard, etc. The modified rule set never caught on; before long, the fold was reinstated and the artistic error reversed.

From a different perspective, though - admittedly, one largely indifferent to the aesthetic and political concerns of the Surrealists - there's something fascinating about this "mistake," about the posulate of a sort of "perfect" or "complete" form of collaboration that would boomerang back in the direction of artistic unity. Far form being a drab return to the status quo, such a text would be highly exotic. What if you could actually create a work of art in which the authorial intention - factually speaking - was so plural, so scrambled, so continuous, so liquid that it would be _ontologically_ impossible to draw straight lines between any discrete part of the text and a responsible mind [FN: It's easy and commonplace to create texts for which this task is just _epistemiologically_ difficult] - and yet still retain all of the formal characteristics of a single-author work and fulfill all of the definitional requirements "authorship" and "meaning" in the strictly traditional sense of the idea (save one, of course)? Would such a text have an author? Would it even have authorS, in the sense that the Exquisite Corpse clearly does? How would it fit into existing interpretive frameworks designed for "normal" texts, most of which are predicated on either a positive or negative reaction to the biographical fact that the text has an author?


### Exquisite Haiku and Intentionless Meaning

In an effort to explore this question, I built Exquisite Haiku, a real-time, collaborative web application written in JavaScript on the Node.js framework that makes it possible for groups of people - as few as two, and theoretically as many as about 1000 - to work together in an interactive, synchronous environment to compose three-line English haiku in a standard 5-7-5 syllable pattern. Trying to pick up where Breton's "error" left off, the software attempts to push the register of collaboration "down" to _within_ or _below_ the selection of individual words in the text. Instead of allowing individuals to unilaterally create or select discretely-addressable units of the work (folds of the page, sentences, phrases, or even individual words), the poem is constructed word-by-word, in order, by way of an extended consensus-forming process that is designed to completely scramble the individual artistic intentionalities of the players without ever resorting to any kind of randomness or non-determinism.

The words are selected one-by-one in a series of consecutive "word rounds" that are allotted a constant amount of time at the beginning of the poem. At the end of each word round, the word that emerges with the most "points" after an interactive voting and visual conversation process is locked into the next position in the haiku, and the process starts again for the next word. At the start of each word round, players are presented with three key pieces of information - the words that have already been locked in the poem (which, unless the player arrives late, she would have just participated in selecting), a count-down timer showing the amount of time left in the round, and a points counter, showing the number of points available to be allocated to words (this is also a constant number, the same for each round, set at the start). The player can submit "proposals" by typing into a blank input box at the top of the screen and pressing Enter. The software checks to see if the word fits into the syllable pattern of the poem in its current state, and, if so, pushes the new word onto a main, vertical stack called the "ranking stack" that is continuously updated to reflect the current ordering of all the words in terms of total "score."

Starting immediately, and continuing as more word proposals are submitted and the stack grows in size, each player can start to exert influence over the order of the ranking stack by applying positive or negative votes, of arbitrary size, onto individual words. These votes are executed by clicking on a word, dragging the cursor up or down on the page, and pressing the Spacebar to commit the vote. The value of the vote is determined by the radial distance, in pixels, from the original click that initiated the vote (this value is displayed in real-time next to the cursor as it moves on the page). There's no limit to how small or large any individual vote can be, but the sum of a player's votes (in terms of absolute value, with negative votes "costing" as much as positive votes) can never exceed the total value of the player's point account, which is reset at the start of each word round.

Each vote plays out _over time_ - instead of just lumping the entire value of the vote onto the total score of the word all at once, possibly causing an immediate reordering of the stack if the word falls above or below one of its neighbors, the value of the vote is gradually layered onto the word over the course of 30-40 seconds in accordance with an exponential decay curve recomputed every 300 milliseconds by the server. As the vote "plays out," the physical size of the word in the stack dilates to visually communicate the effect of the vote to the rest of the players - large at first, and then increasingly small as the vote dissipates. This scaling effect is cumulative for all the votes on a word at any given point - if a word has multiple positive votes, it will grow even larger in proportion to the total instantaneous value of the votes, and concurrent negative votes will push down the size.

Meanwhile, each vote is also reflected in real-time in a second stack called the "log stack" that is rendered to the left of the main "ranking stack." While the growing and contracting sizes of the words in the ranking stack reflect the aggregate effects of the currently-active votes on the words, the log stack just provides a running, ticker-tape feed of each individual voting action - for each vote, the log stack is updated with a new entry showing the word that was voted on and the numerical quantity of the vote. In addition to providing a kind of "comprehensive" data feed about all the activity in the game, the log stack introduces a second way to apply votes: Players can "re-vote" any of the votes in the log stack by just clicking on the listing - this generates an exact replica of the vote under the player's name, this time deducting points from the account of the player who triggers the re-vote. This encourages a kind of "cascading" or "snowballing" dynamic in the game that increases the volatility and churn of the ranking stack - players will often latch on to a vote that they agree with by re-voting it multiple times, causing a sudden flood of points that push the word dramatically up or down.

The interface becomes shifting, scrolling tableau of floating words that communicates a constant flow of real-time information about the opinions of all the other players about all of the words. This improvisational, ludic process makes it possible to conduct a visually-enacted _conversation_ or _deliberation_ about the words, a kind of hashing-out and collective evaluation of the possibilities in which the agency of each individual is normalized and constrained by the equal distribution of points at the start of each round. The software, in other words, amounts to a kind of microscopic literary democracy for word selection, a set of procedures designed to marshal the disparate opinions and energies of the group into a single, most fair, most representative, most deliberate course of action.

[determinism]


### Intentional Intentionlessness

In the way that e^-1/x _approaches_ 0 as x increases, I argue that the texts that emerge from this process approach complete _unattributability_ and _authorlessness_ as the number of players increases. True, some individual player (or some subset of the players) can be said to "win" each of the rounds if she/they happen to have submitted the winning word. But in almost all cases this is at best just a _partial_ intention - it would be extremely rare (and incredibly boring) to just submit a single word and spend the entire round repeatedly applying positive votes to just that one word. In practice, each players' intentionality is spread across multiple submissions and hundreds (and, without much difficulty, thousands) of positive and negative votes on dozens of words. And conversely, a player can never become excluded from the community of intentionality if she strongly disagrees with a winning word. Since it's impossible to modify words that have already been locked, as soon as the next round starts and the "losers" start to propose and react to new possibilities for the next word, the nature of the syntagmatic meaning-making is such that their intention immediately becomes kneaded back into the poem as it flexes in response to the unchangeable structure of what's already there.

In a very real sense, then, these texts can be thought of as a kind of enactment or staging of the whole range author-disregarding (or at least author-minimizing) _construals_ of literature that thrived in the 20th century (New Criticism, structuralism, etc.), which, in virtue of the fact that they were alwas dealing with texts that did, in fact, factually have authors, were always compelled to contain themselves to critical stance. The "death" of the author, as narrated by Wimsatt, Beardslet, et al. is really just the death of the critical concern for the author; but Exquisite Haiku can be understood to actually enact that critical move by reaching behind the text and meddling with the "biographical" mechanics of its production. Indeed, more nuanced attempts to make sense of the hermeneutical status of texts created by way of Exquisite Haiku immediately tend to grasp as the paradigms that just these theorists plugged in to the hole once intentionalism was found to be inadequate - the poems originate in some kind of social milieu of the group, a political or social energy in the air, the will of the interpretive community.

And yet, strangely enough, far from just pleasing post-intentionalists and antagonizing intentionalists, there's a strange sense in which Exquisite Haiku has the effect of methodologically collapsing the two camps. What would a strongly intentionalist reading of one of these poems look like? Since there historically, factually, biographically is no singular, coherent intention to be heeded, even the most fastidiously intentionalist of readers is unthethered to roam freely in the enormously expanded and diversified domain of intentionality that sits behind the poems. There just is no recognizable intention in the traditional sense of the word, and it seems to me that the only intellectually consistent course of action for an intentionalist is to formulate _multiple_ readings, a set of interpretations in a justified effort to fill the dilated space of true-life intentionality. This quickly begins to resemble a formalism.
