# Digital poetry in Silicon Valley

For about two years, back between 2011 and 2013, I spent a bunch of time working on a very strange, very fun side project called Exquisite Haiku. The idea was pretty simple. I wanted to see if I could write a web application that would make it possible for groups of people - 2, 200, 2000, whatever - to work together in a real-time, interactive environment to compose short little poems that would emerge, in some kind of organic way, from the collective intelligence of the group.

An early version of this idea originally popped into my head back in college, when I was reading a bunch of literary theory and got interested in the idea of an "authorless" text, which, for various reasons, was a recurring theme that binds together a big chunk of 20th century literary criticism. In the 20s and 30s, the New Critics dispatched with the old, traditional notion of an "Author" with a capital "A", arguing that a piece of literature is a self-contained little system that isn't controlled by anyone else, even the person who created it. In the 60's, Barthes and Foucault proclaimed that the author was "dead," although they were coming at the question from a different angle - the author, for a lot of good reasons, became associated patriarchy, hierarchy, and imperialism, a symbol for top-down narratives about truth and meaning. But, then the author had a comeback in the 80's and 90's with the rise of the new historicists and the neo-pragmatists, who basically said - hold on a second, this is getting a little out of wack, books actually are written by authors who are trying to say things. I don't have a horse in the race, but the whole time I found myself thinking - "Ha! But what if there actually were a text that really, literally, _factually_ didn't have an author"? A poem that materializes out of thin air, a piece of language that can't be traced back to any individual person, but still has all the qualities of a text that can - the unity, the coherence, the sense that it really _means_ something? Could a text like that ever actually exist? Could you create one?

It's an interesting paradox. You can't just sit down and write one yourself, since then you'd be the author. And, short of inventing some kind of hard AI, it's hard to write a computer program to generate texts that would fit the bill. It's easy to spit out _random_ texts, but that throws the baby out with the bath water - the author is gone, but so is the sense that the text encodes some kind of specific intention, a "speaker meaning," to borrow Searle's term. Then, I tried out a different tack. What if, intead of trying to remove the author, you spread the authorship so thin that it turns into something that can't really be called authorship at all? Distribute it across lots of people - _increase_ the number of authors - until it's so scrambled, so finely-chopped, that it becomes impossible to draw a line from any part of the text back to any individual person. You would need an extreme form of collaboration, a social algorithm that could roll together the ideas of lots of people in a perfectly balanced way that would represent all of them at once, but none of them individually.

After rolling this around in my head for a couple of years after college, I was bored with the literary theory but interested in this second, more abstract version of the question - would it be possible to engineer some kind of "generative" digital collaboration



